hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery again Joe
and I part six let's get right on it
part five ended with Joe and lies
returned to Beijing after a historically
good performance at the Geneva
Conference April 26 to July 20th 1954
Joe and I sure made China look good in
front of the Americans British and
French made the most of his time to try
and create some semblance of a
diplomatic relationship with these
Western allies with the case of the
United States you walked away from the
conference quite pleased with himself
although official relations would have
to wait until done shall Ping's time
January 1979 President Jimmy Carter Joe
made the most of the opportunity in
Geneva he had created backdoor channels
to keep an unofficial dialogue going
with the United States which was better
than nothing
with the country only formally
established in October 1949 Joe and I
had his hands full trying to get the
framework put in place to manage a
government he quietly did this and
groomed a lot of people along the way in
the foreign ministry especially and in
other ministries under the State Council
this was a tall order to lead this
effort to lift China up from the ruins
going back to that opium war practically
and get a working government in place to
handle the needs of 540 million people
most of them poor and living in rural
areas China's per capita income was
about half of India's that wasn't some
nine-to-five job Joe and I had to juggle
a lot of balls and we're a hundred hands
to get it done and then so early in the
history of the PRC the Korean War
happened Mao put Joe in charge so he had
to deal with that as well the Korean War
later on leads to the Geneva Conference
and now here we are today in part six
you think Joe already had his hands full
and that any further responsibility
would be the proverbial straw well
remember
- dong zhuo also had to deal with him -
Mao had a lot of big ideas about what he
wanted to do now that he was in the
driver's seat two big things on his mind
were land reform and weeding out the
last of the counter revolutionaries who
managed to slip through the yen on
rectification campaign right as Mao was
doing this came the Calgon affair go was
a shiny she communist from as far back
as 1926 he was a peasant not very
literate but very capable and filled
with ambition the main thing he was
remembered for aside from this a fear
that bears his name was handing yen on
over to Mao at the end of the long march
gal was instrumental in getting that
base set up and it's at that base where
Mao decided he'd stay after the long
march at least until 1947 those two hit
it off and there was no question of
God's loyalty to mom when the showdown
with Wang Ming happened Gao supported
mom the problem really began in July
1949 when Mao sent gong gong to Russia
and during that time Gao became very
close with the Soviets suspiciously
close
that's when talk began to get around the
party in her circles and furring GAO is
getting a just a little bit too cozy
with the Soviets nothing came of it for
a while
Gao wasn't a very sophisticated or
politically savvy fella he didn't he
didn't know how to keep his trap shut
and he misjudged where he stood with the
capricious Chairman Mao while Joe and I
was in the trenches pouring the
foundation for the new State Council
dealing with the Korean War doing all
the heavy lifting with regard to PRC
diplomacy and co-managing the first
five-year plan he also had to deal with
the gonk gonk affair go to make a long
story short was the top political and
economic leader in the Northeast he was
the king of Manchuria and being in
charge of such a place as that he had
plenty of dealings with
Soviets Russia always coveted Manchuria
going back to the time of the SARS in
1953 they were still there as entrenched
as ever the Joe and lie though the
economy was not as great as strength was
tasked by Mao to spearhead the first
five-year plan as you recall the Korean
War was Joe's last military assignment
and after that Mao passed this CMC
leadership job to ponga why that was a
big load off Joe no doubt so Joe took
charge of this first five-year plan and
in August 1952 he personally with
genuine leaf Lewin and others went to
Moscow to go cap in hand to Stalin to
see how much of China's wish list he was
gonna fund on August 20th Joe said
across the table from Stalin the great
Russian leader would be dead in seven
months but he was still very much alive
and very much intimidating
unlike Joe who was not an economics and
Finance guy the Stalin was and he
couldn't scoff enough at the plan Joe
presented he found fault with every
request and statistic and I'm sure even
premier Joe had to be squirming in a
seat Joe's wish list had 151 projects
listed no question about it Joe had to
face down Stalin and say this was what
China needed and as I said Joseph Stalin
was not making this easy for China's
premier I mean think about that in
today's context can you imagine in a
thousand years Lee kichan going to
Vladimir Putin and trying to get him to
fund some infrastructure projects in
China and of course Joe reminded Stalin
that while he stood behind the curtain
during the Korean War like The Wizard of
Oz it was China who had the face
American bombs and bullets it was
Chinese soldiers who got decimated on
the battlefield and in the hundreds of
thousands and froze to death in the
Korean winter China took the entirety of
the bad rap from the Korean War it was
just short of an international
riah because of it so in a way he was
payback time and for Stalin to
reconsider his way of looking at the
whole thing when they shook hands the
USSR that is Stalin had okayed funding
for a hundred and fifty of these
projects on China's wish list the first
five-year plan pretty much emulated the
Soviet model and it was during this
period that followed all the way up to
the sino-soviet split that china was
crawling with soviet engineers and
apparatchik s-- working on all these
massive heavy industrial projects all
over china but mostly in the Northeast
gauguin territory Soviet influence in
China was at its peak by this point they
already should have evacuated Port
Arthur Liu Xuan cult or in Leone as part
of the deal worked out where she got to
stay there a little bit longer and with
that
September 22nd 1952 Joe headed back to
Beijing leaving the task of working out
the details to the future and his staff
no sooner had Joe returned after getting
the whole five-year plan done my wedding
took China's economy away from his
portfolio of responsibilities this left
Joe to focus on the country's
administration and foreign policy not a
small job but the way things work in
China today and back then too when all
the sudden the top leader starts
stripping away all your leadership
positions it always pretends a fall from
grace any China watcher would reasonably
conclude poor old Joe and like his star
was falling she would today have done
everyone knew the Soviets loved gaga
Stalin had even once lauded him as a
true internationalist so when word got
back to Mao that gal gang was shooting
his mouth off in front of his Soviet
chums and cozying up to them in an
inappropriate manner and even revealing
very sensitive party info smoke started
coming out of the Chairman's ears in a
style that would become all too familiar
later on Mao head supposedly told Gao
cash
that you know he was dissatisfied with
Joe and lye and Leo xiaochi and they
weren't doing their jobs well and Leo
was a foot dragger when it came to
carrying out with Mao wanted now after
the garlic got enough air and not too
many people ever made this mistake again
but gal took this to mean that Mao was
giving him the go-ahead to get rid of
Joe and Leo and this is exactly what
gout got started trying to do behind the
scenes one on one lobbying with key
party leaders not being terribly
discreet he went right at Leo Shao Qi
and tried to bring him down now at this
time in the CCP pecking order Mao was of
course ranked first Leo second
Joanne lai third Judah fourth genuine
fifth and Gauguin was sixth in the
Politburo not the top five but not a
lightweight either that was a sidebar to
all this ma wasn't terribly happy with
Leo Shao Qi in 1952 53 so his
manipulation of gal Gong had the
additional objective to scare Leo sha
Chi into shape and show him don't piss
off Chairman Mao nor take his words
lightly Leo had done a few things that
hadn't made Mao happy so Maul allowed
gall to savage Leo Shao Qi and put the
fear of God into him so to speak by late
1953 though Maya decided to put an end
to this game he was playing though Shao
Qi had been properly frightened into
line and Maul knew Joe wasn't gonna push
back on anything the thing that
triggered Mao's decision to whack Gao
Gong him about after Tong Xiao ping and
qianyuan went to Ma and told on Calgon
they informed Mao everything God was
trying to do behind the scenes and what
he was saying to them and to other top
party officials that Leo had to go and
Joe should step aside for some new blood
to take over and basically doing the
unthinkable attempting to split the
party so dung and Chung right around
Christmastime 1953 suggested to Mao that
something needed to be done in this case
mouths decision was to pick up and head
down to beautiful hung Jo to hang out on
the
shores of Westlake and a sumptuous villa
but before he left in December Mao
attended a meeting and called Gauguin
out for his anti party alliance and for
setting up a second headquarters in
Beijing that rivaled the current
headquarters that had Mao at the helm he
was too close and too indiscreet with
the Soviets and he was trying to split
the party and he was unashamedly setting
up his own Little Kingdom up in
Manchuria Ilyitch I'm told in that was
about as final and irrevocable of a
political death sentence as one could
possibly get back in 1953-54 China Mao
had made the decision that Gao Cong had
to go so after banging the gavel and
heading down to idyllic Hangzhou Mao put
Leo Shao Qi in charge of the party then
anyone who doubted whether or not Leo
was still number two in the standings
had that question answered this was one
sudden and violent reversal of fortune
for Gao hung one minute he thought he
had chairman mao on his side the next
minute he found the Chairman had cut him
loose and now Joe and Lai who cow had
tried to push aside was put in charge of
prosecuting him gong met his fate at the
fourth plenum of the seventh Central
Committee in the end it was left to Joe
and ly to deconstruct go gong before
everyone and he did it was so much gusto
that it drove God at two suicide
attempts on February 17 1954 and six
months later in August he succeeded on
the second attempt and asked for premier
Joe he was still ranked number three in
the economy was reorganized under an
organ known as the State Planning
Commission this was headed by a Joe man
going back to the Paris days leafwich 1
& 2 show Joe was back in Mao's good
graces the State Planning Commission was
put back under Joe's side of the orchard
besides leaf Yuen at the State Planning
Commission yet genuine in charge of the
state finance Commission and boy boy
heading the state Economic Commission
all reported to Joe all this time
gong-gong affair was going on Joe was
dealing with the aftermath of the Korean
War so when he was locked up in a room
ripping Golconda shreds in front of
those go had sought to replace it was
only two months away from the Geneva
Conference never a dull moment with
premier Joe so the upshot to all this
was that Mao yanked Leo xiaochi back in
a line got the word out to everyone not
to talk to the Soviets or get too cozy
with them don't mess with party unity
and most of all remember who was in
charge or else you'll be the next gal
gong this was the first but of course
not the last major high-level purge and
PRC history now I didn't mention Gao had
an accomplice to all this Nimrod shoe
sure raw was to Shanghai what gall was
to Manchuria raw to got severely
reprimanded for his role and siding with
Gao and spent the next 20 years in
prison
dying there 1975 this whole matter is
also known as the gaol rau affair or the
gaol Ralph and dong Lian monk let's just
touch also on the Sun Khan and wolf on
campaigns these started off towards the
waning days of 1951 Joe and I had his
hands full with the Korean War at this
time but Mao decided he wanted to start
going after certain elements of Chinese
society this presented quite a headache
to Joe and life as I've mentioned a few
times going back to the earliest days
Joe had always been a proponent of
building bridges with those who were not
dedicated communist including
industrialists many intellectuals and of
course capitalists Joe had been the
voice of reason convincing this element
of Chinese society going back to even
before the Chongqing years to keep an
open mind about the Communists and
China's future yet spent years
cultivating many of these relationships
personally well with the three ante and
especially the five ante campaign a lot
of these people will ask themselves why
they were so naive to listen to Joe and
lie the Sun pond or three auntie's where
corruption waste and bureaucracy yeah
taun will her long face shirt she
thought the fancy that was a nice
rhyming couplet from mao corruption and
waste were the biggest crimes
now this campaign almost entirely
targeted party members mostly in urban
areas the ones targeted of course were
those whose loyalty to Mao was most in
question this is where anyone for
example from the KMT who switched sides
and stayed behind this is where they got
it
ironically it was Gaga who launched the
campaign and his stronghold of Manchuria
before it was rolled out nationally the
five auntie's campaign started later but
ran alongside the three auntie's this is
the one where the capitalists and the
bourgeoisie got it the circumference of
the umbrella that made up the five
auntie's was broad enough whereby any
juicer funds Oh or it's a bunch o age'
could be rounded up and persecuted the
five auntie's were bribery theft of
state property tax evasion cheating on
government contracts and stealing state
economic information and anyone with a
shingle hanging in front of somewhere
was suspect
yeah 1952 it was a bad year for
capitalism in the PRC and if you had a
beef with your boss
opportunity knocked a lot of payback and
retribution was meted out during the
five auntie's Jo perhaps did what he
could to save people here and there but
for the most part many of these people
who he had convinced to remain behind
and give the PRC a chance were ruined
during this campaign so land reform
pretty much did away with the rural
gentry who had it so good for pretty
much all of Chinese history going back
to the Shang Dynasty next up where the
bourgeoisie who had stayed behind helped
get commerce and industry back up and
running then when everything was okay by
1950 to 1953 they had outlived their
usefulness and so they too had to take
that walk of shame premier Jo had to
look the other way nothing he can do Mao
wasn't so sure the bourgeoisie were on
his side so this was the time he
to eliminate that threat so let's
finally get to the bond owned conference
if the Geneva Conference was Jo and lies
big debut to the Western powers the bond
dome conference was his inaugural
meeting with the powers that be in his
own backyard as well as in Africa the
Asian African conference took place in
Bandung Indonesia between April 18th and
24th 1955
Sukarno hosted this event 29 countries
participated and it was announced the
previous December the upshot of the
Bandung conference was a 10-point
declaration that essentially
incorporated the five principles of
peaceful coexistence that Jo and lion
Nehru had agreed to just recently we
looked at that in the last episode Jo
had a lot riding on this meeting all
these nations may have had a lot in
common with respect to their colonial
and imperialist past that is being on
the wrong end of those two systems but
it was a decidedly non China friendly
crowd so into this lion's den Jo and I
went he figured this was going to be a
golden opportunity to reach out to all
these non-aligned nations not on
Russia's side not on America's side
either this made them all potential
China friends when it came time for Jo
to fly out to Bonn dome to attend there
was an attempt to snuff him out
good old caac jonghwa mean hyung they
didn't have the wherewithal yet to
transport Jo and his team to Jakarta so
Nehru kindly offered an Air India plane
to Jo in the Chinese delegation and this
plane was called the Kashmir princess a
few hours after it flew out of Hong Kong
sky Tak Airport around 7 p.m.
cruising at an altitude of 17,000 feet
it exploded someone had stuck a time
bomb in the wheel housing and it brought
the plane down Jo wasn't on the flight
he had been tipped off about what was
coming only three crew members survived
everyone else 16 people and all were
killed the Kashmir princess's air plan
called for the flight to go from Hong
Kong to Jakarta
on April 11th 1955 the Chinese
delegation would travel on this plane
including Joe and Lai and Chen Yi word
had gotten to Joe that KMT operatives at
Kai Tak Airport were planning to
sabotage his plane at the last minute
Joel and Cheung he got off and the rest
of the delegation went ahead these were
not high-ranking staff and Joe made the
call to sacrifice all 16 of them for the
sake of the bigger picture and the
bigger picture was the future
cooperation Joe ended up getting from
the British authorities in Hong Kong in
closing down this KMT spy network
operating in the colony from this
incident it led to other areas of
behind-the-scenes cooperation between
Britain and China the other thing was
the sympathy Joe garnered from those
attending the conference as I said it
wasn't a hostile crowd that Joe was
going to face but it certainly wasn't
friendly the assassination attempt on
his life contributed to loosening things
up a bit for China's premier come
Foreign Minister it said the Americans
were in cahoots with the KMT spooks that
messed with the Kashmir princess there
seemed to be some evidence and even an
admission later on by a retired US in
telophase involved in the incident when
Kissinger met Joe and lied back in 1971
when he was doing the advance work for
the upcoming Nixon visit Joe asked
Kissinger if the Americans had tried to
bump him off in April of 1955 Kissinger
supposedly replied quote mr. premier you
greatly overestimate the competence of
the CIA end quote
Joe did quite a bit at this conference
to calm the waters and build some
bridges where the strongest animosity
had previously existed many of the
representatives started hatin on China
as soon as Joe settled down in his chair
in no time at all things had degraded to
the point where this discussion of a
non-aligned movement turned into an
anti-communist ranting forum a lot of
voices were saying the Communists
alternate
that china was preaching everywhere was
no better or worse than what the
imperialists and colonialists had to
offer by 1955 when this bond dome
conference was going on the chamber of
horrors that went on under Stalin and
the Soviet Union was no secret the
dreaded ugly side of communism had
reared its ugly head already and it
wasn't so easy for Joe to discard this
mantle that was being placed on him our
ally we could always count on them the
Republic of the Philippines even went so
far as to attack China not by name of
course but by using me more
diplomatically tactful term certain
countries who were trying too hard to
emulate the Soviet ways so Joe had to
answer to all this at van dong and of
course remember going back to the mid
19th century the Chinese diaspora had
already spread out far and wide all over
the world and were citizens for many
generations in all the countries of
Southeast Asia the representatives of
these nations groused ed Joe saying
China was stirring these people up and
causing unwanted revolution in their
respective countries the Thai prince who
attended the Bandung conference
downright pointed a finger at Joe and
accused him meaning China of arming
anti-government rebels along the Thai
Yunnan border Mao had been a big
proponent of supporting revolution
elsewhere so Joe as usual whenever Mao
was concerned had to tread very
carefully after a while it became clear
to Joe that things weren't working out
like he expected in the face of all
these accusations Joe had to throw away
the PlayBook and make something up on
the fly his speech that he intended to
give was printed and distributed then he
gave another speech and in this
convincing impromptu performance he
managed to sway all but the most
virulent of American allies he made it
clear China had its own problems and had
no intentions of interfering in any
other country's affairs they would not
support any kind
movements or attempt to exert any
influence over the local overseas
Chinese who called these Southeast Asian
Nations home the sticking point for many
well Indonesia especially was the
principle of you sanguinis this is a
Latin word meaning right of blood he
went back to the final years of the
Ching dynasty 1909 and said if you were
ethnic Chinese born and bred in Jakarta
for example you still had as far as
China was concerned right to become a
Chinese citizen this whole thing implied
that there were dual loyalties and as
far as this state of affairs existed who
could possibly trust their ethnic
Chinese citizens Zhuo signed a treaty
that settled that matter for the time
being once
Sukarno was overthrown in 1965 in a
communist coup the era of living
dangerously that will usher in a new
chapter for overseas Chinese there but
for the time being in 1955 when the
treaty was ratified in 1957 the issue
was put to an uneasy slumber as far as
where the political loyalties of the
overseas Chinese rested plenty of
overseas Chinese are not going to be
happy about losing this right that Joe
and I took away from them meanwhile back
in the homeland and Joan Don High in
particular things weren't so tranquil
the main reason was that Mao wasn't
happy with the slow pace of rural
collectivization this was the period
when he uttered the famous words that
his colleagues were quote tottering
along like a woman with bound feet
end quote Mao wanted faster results in
October in 1955 Joe was fully on board
with this order from the top then an
amazing thing happened by November 1956
just a year later ninety-six percent of
rural households in China had been
collectivized this was quite a
transformation as you can imagine the
whole podcast series in itself but
collectivise China did successfully as
instructed by Mao himself so if he ever
wondered where Mao got this idea that he
could just make these
and Dios demands for economic results
and make them happen this is where that
notion came from by the successful
conclusion of the five antes not only
had agricultural been transformed but
private industry as well
80 to 90 percent of Commerce and
Industry was under mostly government
control this was quite an achievement
mounted dong was a lot of things but he
was not an economist perhaps dizzy with
success he felt this same kind of single
mindedness and mobilization of the
masses and all-out push for results
could work in rapidly industrializing
china and so began the Great Leap
Forward Joe had been the one trying to
push back against the Mao juggernaut
that kept demanding an end to economic
conservatism that was the buzzword back
in 1956-57 Mao was saying dry faster and
economic conservatives though they live
to regret it later on didn't listen and
follow orders and Joe had been the most
vocal in the party opposing Mao and
moving forward too rashly because of
this Joe was gonna be forced to go
through one of those things again where
if he said may a culpa ten thousand
times it wouldn't have been enough for
Chairman Mao and when people began to
ask after Joe and I passed away why
didn't he stop Chairman Mao from
allowing the Cultural Revolution to
happen the events of 1958 maybe shed
some light on that question 1956-57
whenever I hear those two years in the
context of Chinese history I always
think of the hundred Flowers and
anti-rightist movements these two years
were hardly calm years but there were
certainly the calm before the storm that
would hit in 1958 my you just before and
during the hundred Flowers and
anti-rightist campaigns Joe was racking
up the frequent flyer miles carrying his
foreign minister briefcase while he was
concurrently dealing with these profound
party matters and Chairman Mao throwing
down the gauntlet to everyone his
efforts were tireless in getting
PRC plugged in and networked with the
rest of the world but the Chairman Mao's
sign of his job up to the end would
always be chose highest priority it was
thought that maybe it wouldn't be such a
bad idea
given how horrible intellectuals had had
it during the first five years of the
PRC's history if they were allowed to
get some things off their chests I'm not
sure how enthusiastic Mao was knowing
his tolerance for criticism but he went
along with Joe on this so April 1956 Mao
gives the whole let one hundred flowers
bloom and a hundred schools of thought
contend speech people were starting to
talk but of course they're holding back
from expressing their truest feelings
meanwhile Mao is feeling the heat
Khrushchev's secret speech the polish
and Hungarian uprisings and no one
taking him seriously about his ideas for
all-out mobilization of the masses to
grow the economy Joe had gone to Moscow
shortly after Khrushchev's secret speech
was made and went straight to the Soviet
leader and basically said hey what the
hell man he registered Mao's feelings
about how easily Stalin had gotten
thrown under the bus in February 1957
Mao gave the official go-ahead for the
hundred Flowers campaign to roll out and
that is something he lived to regret in
three months the torrent of vitriol
being hurled at the party and at Mao and
the leadership was alarming to say the
least when the headline of the people's
daily read Mao Zedong Joe and Lai it's
time for you to step down Mao had to put
an end to this great idea of premier
Jose and so followed the anti-rightist
campaign now put dung shopping in charge
of this one about five hundred and fifty
thousand rightists got paid back for
their honesty like with the Cultural
Revolution that would follow a decade
later people's lives were ruined by
either humiliation death and everything
in between
of these over half million people
affected by 1957 and
Rytas campaign Joe tried to save as many
as he could under the circumstances
however it wasn't easy and like he did
with the five auntie's he had to turn
away when the victims were let out the
back door but still in September 1957 at
the third plenum Mao began to make more
noise than usual about his policies he
was fishing for the Great Leap Forward
was what he was trying to do but too
many leaders led by Joe and Lai were
pushing back and saying slow the heck
down and all this while the
anti-rightist campaign was at a full
boil so everyone was completely on edge
and no one dared predict who Mao was
gonna come down on next and Joe was
working with genuine boy he bought Li
xiannian to work out the final details
of the second five-year plan they had
considerably scaled down the ambitious
plans that Mao had demanded and Mao
remained quiet for the time being
watching listening it had been more than
a year since Khrushchev disposed of
Stalin and his legacy now Mao was lying
in wait to see who were his Khrushchev's
when mail came back from the Soviet
Union's 40th anniversary of the
revolution in October 1957 he was
thoroughly convinced the split was
inevitable and coming soon
Sputnik had just happened on October 4th
the time had come to get out from behind
Russia's shadow this is where Zhu Li
Cunxin was born and for the sake of
silly Kong some twenty to forty million
people will perish from starvation and
neglect Xue Liang Shan was what the
North Koreans called choocha it means
self-reliance nobody helping you do it
yourself
Mao truly thought if you got everyone
involved anything could be overcome
Red Bull whole Punisher Joe was now
operating in a very difficult dynamic he
had pissed Chairman Mao off with all the
blowback and embarrassment of the
hundred Flowers movement and he was
talking louder than anyone else in the
party against Mao's economic directives
and called them rash
now use the extent of his Dignitas and
October tasks and expanded the scope of
the anti-rightist campaign I made it
clear to all if you opposed his economic
policies and back the Conservatives you
too were now a rightist that was
Chairman Mao's line in the sand those
who thought mile would come to his
senses played that one dead wrong and
mouth showed everyone most of all Joe
and Lai who was in charge there was a
conference an awning guanxi province
January 1958 Mao attacked Joe and Joe
back down and with that lie the road to
the Great Leap Forward well no need to
rehash the whole Great Leap Forward
everything Joe warned it would be it was
1958 was a difficult year for China's
premier the non-being conference were
Mao Kao Joe and the CCP leadership took
place in January by November December
1958 after the country's well-being was
put on the backburner and everyone got
on board the Great Leap Forward trained
the magnitude of the looming disaster
first began to manifest itself before
the truth became known Joe had to go
before all party leaders and say he was
wrong and Mao was right he had to taken
again from Mao and Chengdu in March 1958
there he had to hang his head in shame
while Mao castigated him Joe made a
string of self criticisms throughout
that year one more sincere and contrite
than the next
he just repeatedly fell on his sword to
make the point that he was sorry for
going against Mao and what ultimately
became the Great Leap Forward genuine
boet ball Li xiannian
those guys too they were all chose
accomplices in this matter the Coupe de
Grasse was Joe's self-criticism at the
eighth Party Congress once Joe stood
before a thousand delegates and for the
umpteenth time admitted his mistake and
going against Mao's correct line Mao was
finally convinced Joe had learned his
furthermore by giving it so hard to
someone like Joe and lie Mao felt secure
that the rest of the party leadership
would fall into line
this of course they did by the way in
March 1958 while Joe was getting raked
over the coals he was carrying out the
initial investigation into what would
become the three gorges dam project that
idea went back all the way to Joe in the
in the 50s in February 1958 Joe handed
off the foreign ministers position to
Chagny Matt took a load off I'm sure
these unofficial ties with the US that
Joe had set up in Geneva were
temporarily cut from late 1957 into most
of 1958
yeah 1957-58 and for sure in 1959 those
were some rough waters at the upper
echelon to the PRC I know the Cultural
Revolution always grabs the headlines as
far as times of great chaos go but the
period from the anti-rightist movement
in 1957 up through the Great Leap
Forward not a good time for many and
this extended to rats flies mosquitoes
and sparrows the government turned the
entire population on these four pests
the Eurasian tree Sparrow was almost but
not quite
driven to extinction between 1958 and
1962 once this campaign against the
sparrows came to its successful
conclusion the crop eating insects of
China's agricultural heartland had their
own Tang Dynasty
well Khrushchev came to Beijing in the
summer of 1958 and he just went on and
on about this whole crazy idea of Mao's
he mints no words and said China was
heading up the creek without a paddle
the big picture problem for Joe Enlai as
the summer of 1958 grew hotter and
steamier was that he and everyone else
except Mao and his most devoted
sycophants knew Khrushchev was right
this was by all accounts from very
rational and informed people a recipe
for the makings of the biggest economic
and human disaster and perhaps all of
recent
Chinese history maybe even since ancient
times what was happening now was the
setup to the horrific famine that was to
follow that these production figures
rosy reports being sent up the totem
pole all the way to Mao were all a sham
and was now common knowledge the one
thing that everyone was thinking end of
1958 was that hmm looks like premier Joe
was right all along
and Mao was wrong by November it was
evident that our times were about to
befall the PRC Mao had to retreat
slightly and think about how to spin
this no doubt Leo Shao Qi at this point
was made stake chairman this position
doesn't exist anymore
Mao was still Party Chairman and CMC
Chairman and those were the only two
that mattered here's the year turned in
1959 Joe was still as busy as ever I'm
not sure how he felt vindicated he was
laying low and conducting himself very
appropriately I don't know how many
meals
Chairman Mao missed during the famine
years but Joe served as a model with
respect to being in solidarity with the
hungry masses the stories about the
lengths that people went to 1959 60 61
and China to get by day by day have been
well-documented like others during those
years Joe and ly grew thin and he aged a
great deal on June 20th 1959 Khrushchev
backed out of the deal he made to
provide China with nuclear weapons
technology Mao had never felt more
uneasy on his throne that he did in the
summer of 1959 Joe never uttered a word
that was critical of Mao or his obvious
bad idea gone awry others were talking
but the overall mood was - keep your
mouth shut
Joe arrived at Liu Shan in genchi
province on July 2nd 1959 what everyone
thought the Liu Shan conference was
going to be received a shocking lesson
in how Chairman Mao operated the
prevailing opinion going into this meat
was that Mao was gonna back down on the
Great Leap and make some kind of an
admission that it wasn't such a good
idea and maybe he might even accept the
blame after much quiet discussion Poong
de why gave his famous private letter to
Chairman Mao on July 14th Mao read it to
everyone a few days later Mao knew Poong
didn't write it himself that a man of
pongs sophistication surely had help in
writing this critical letter Mao knew
what everyone was thinking once the
topic was up for discussion Mao at first
came in for a high degree of criticism
the mistakes were obvious they were
picked up and waved in front of miles
face show and lie however continued his
silence and didn't join in as other
comrades piled on Mao when everyone was
finished having their fun Mao had his
turn to speak first off he apologized to
Joe for criticizing him like he did then
Mao went on the attack as we all know
from many past CHP episodes Mao turned
on panda why and drove the political
sword in deep then anyone who
sympathized with or supported Poong got
it next the message of the Liu Shan
conference was as clear as a bell those
who deviated from Mao's line had to pay
a price and pretty much from this Liu
Shan conference in the summer of 1959
until 17 years later when Mao died in
1976 any criticism of Mao was criticism
with a party no one would ever again
dear to make the mistake of punga why
and the fury
with which mile came down on Poong was
so filled with rage everyone ran for
cover and into the 8th plenum of the 8th
Central Committee Mao kept beating this
drum nice and loud then one by one Joe
and Lai most notably and most critically
all of punga wise comrades going back to
even before the long march came in to
drive their sword into their old comrade
from that point forward he was not
permitted to go against mouth and Mao
rewarded joe for not going against him
at
Shaan and perhaps it was this lesson in
history that Joe remembered when Mao
launched the Cultural Revolution six
years later even someone with Joe in
lies stature and abilities it wasn't so
easy nor so simple to bring down someone
the size of Mao Zedong now that Mao had
made things clear at Liu Shan in the hot
summer of 1959 everyone knew how to
conduct themselves moving forward
throughout 1959 and into 1960 Joe had to
manage China's come back from the brink
by July of 1960 the sino-soviet split
will happen and four months after that
John F Kennedy defeated Richard M Nixon
and one of the closest US elections in
history Joe had his hands full as always
dealing with the magnitude of China's
various crises emergency austerity
measures were put in place to allow the
country to make it through the worst of
times
once Mao gave the okay in 1960 to
retreat from all this madness Joe and
Life rushed in to spearhead the efforts
to put the house back in order the way
it was and 1955-56 this included the
rehabilitation of 40,000 intellectuals
who had been caught up in the
anti-rightist dragnet 20 years later
someone asked tongue shall paying about
Mao's disastrous decisions Doong replied
quote we all bear responsibility for
what happened Mao was hot-headed but
what about all of us we did not oppose
him we went along with him end quote
that's what Joe and I did with Great
Leap Forward and as we'll see did the
same thing when the Cultural Revolution
came along everyone talks about
challenging their boss or telling their
boss off yeah it's easy to do when he's
not around
but when you're face to face most do
what Joe and Lai did keep your mouth
shut this is a nice convenient spot to
slide that bookmark back in we'll pick
up next time in part 7 with the
aftermath of the great leap and all the
drama that followed until then this is
Laszlo Montgomery signing off from Sonny
and gorgeous Los Angeles California 88
degrees ladies and gentlemans
that's 31 Celsius whole rest of the
world more Joe and I to come stick with
the program and consider joining me next
time won't you were happy for another
exciting episode of the China history
podcast